>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, NOVEMBER, 9:
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAYS HE WILL
DEFY WARNINGS FROM REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS AND PRESS
AHEAD WITH IMMIGRATION REFORM ON
HIS OWN.
THE PRESIDENT HEADS TO ASIA FOR
MEETINGS WITH THE CHINESE
LEADER.
WE'LL EXAMINE THE STATE OF
AMERICAN-CHINESE RELATIONS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SET FREE AFTER BEING WRONGLY
CONVICTED BUT WITHOUT THE HELP
THE REAL CRIMINALS GET.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN AN INTERVIEW BROADCAST TODAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA AGAIN WARNED
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER THAT
HE WILL ISSUE AN EXECUTIVE ORDER
ON IMMIGRATION REFORM BY THE END
OF THE YEAR, UNLESS CONGRESS
ACTS FIRST.
>> EVERY DAY THAT I WAIT WE'RE
MISALLOCATING RESOURCES, WE'RE
DEPORTING PEOPLE THAT SHOULDN'T
BE DEPORTED, WE'RE NOT DEPORTING
FOLKS THAT ARE DANGEROUS AND
NEED TO BE DEPORTED.
SO JOHN, I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU
SOME TIME, BUT IF YOU CAN'T GET
IT DONE BEFORE THE END OF THE
YEAR I'M GOING TO HAVE TO TAKE
THE STEPS THAT I CAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE
PASSED A BI-PARTISAN IMMIGRATION
REFORM BILL IN 2013 BUT THE
REPUBLICAN-LED HOUSE NEVER VOTED
ON IT.
DURING THE SAME INTERVIEW ON
CBS's FACE THE NATION PROGRAM,
THE PRESIDENT REFUSED TO RULE
OUT SENDING MORE TROOPS TO IRAQ
BEYOND THE ADDITIONAL 1,500
HE SAID FRIDAY HE WOULD DEPLOY
THERE.
>> SHOULD WE EXPECT THAT MORE
TROOPS MAY BE NEEDED BEFORE THIS
IS OVER?
>> YOU KNOW AS COMMANDER IN
CHIEF I'M NEVER GOING TO SAY
NEVER.
BUT, YOU KNOW, THAT THE
COMMANDERS WHO PRESENTED THE
PLAN TO ME SAY IS THAT WE MAY
ACTUALLY SEE FEWER TROOPS OVER
TIME BECAUSE NOW WE ARE SEEING
COALITION MEMBERS STARTING TO
PARTNER WITH US ON THE TRAINING
AND ASSIST EFFORT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ISRAEL TODAY,
THERE WAS NEW UNREST IN ARAB
COMMUNITIES FOLLOWING THE FATAL
SHOOTING OF A 22-YEAR-OLD ARAB
MAN BY ISRAELI POLICE.
PROTESTERS THREW ROCKS AND
FIREBOMBS, AND ARAB ISRAELI
COMMUNITY LEADERS CALLED A
GENERAL STRIKE.
THEY WERE REACTING TO VIDEO
TAKEN FROM A SECURITY CAMERA.
A WARNING: IT IS GRAPHIC.
IT SHOWS THE MAN REPEATEDLY
POUNDING A POLICE PATROL CAR
WITH SOME SORT OF OBJECT, THEN
BEING SHOT AS HE RETREATED ONCE
AN OFFICER CONFRONTED HIM
OUTSIDE THE VEHICLE.
THE MAN IS THEN DRAGGED INTO THE
CAR AND TAKEN AWAY.
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU REACTED TO THE
DEMONSTRATIONS OVER THE SHOOTING
THIS WAY:
>> (translated): I HAVE
INSTRUCTED THE INTERIOR MINISTER
TO USE ALL MEANS TO STOP THIS,
INCLUDING EVALUATING THE
POSSIBILITY OF REVOKING THE
CITIZENSHIP OF THOSE WHO CALL
FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF THE STATE
OF ISRAEL.
>> Sreenivasan: 20% OF ISRAEL'S
CITIZENS ARE ARABS.
IN AFGHANISTAN TODAY, THE
TALIBAN CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY
FOR A SERIES OF EXPLOSIONS IN
KABUL, INCLUDING ONE AT THE
HEAVILY FORTIFIED POLICE
HEADQUARTERS.
A TOP POLICE OFFICIAL WAS KILLED
ALONG WITH A SUICIDE BOMBER.
ANOTHER BOMB WENT OFF NEAR A BUS
CARRYING SOLDIERS.
NO ONE WAS KILLED IN THAT
ATTACK.
IN BERLIN, CEREMONIES MARKING
THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FALL
OF THE BERLIN WALL.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SPOKE AT A MEMORIAL SERVICE
HONORING THE MORE THAN 130
PEOPLE WHO WERE KILLED BY EAST
GERMAN BORDER GUARDS AS THEY
TRIED TO CROSS FROM EAST TO WEST
DURING THE NEARLY THIRTY YEARS
THE WALL STOOD.
>> (translated): THE FALL OF
THE WALL SHOWED US THAT DREAMS
CAN BECOME REALITY.
NOTHING HAS TO STAY AS IT IS, NO
MATTER HOW HIGH THE BARRICADES
ARE.
>> Sreenivasan: EARLIER THIS
WEEKEND, THE FORMER SOVIET
LEADER, MIKHAIL GORBACHEV,
SPEAKING IN BERLIN, WARNED THAT
EAST-WEST RELATIONS ARE ONCE
AGAIN DETERIORATING.
>> (translated): THE WORLD IS
ON THE BRINK OF A NEW COLD WAR,
SOME ARE EVEN SAYING THAT IT HAS
ALREADY BEGUN.
>> Sreenivasan: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, A NEW GOVERNMENT REPORT
SAYS HOMELESSNESS IS DECLINING.
THE STUDY BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
ESTIMATES THE NUMBER OF HOMELESS
AT 578,000.
THAT REPRESENTS A 25% DROP FROM
2010.
HOMELESSNESS AMONG VETERANS
REPORTEDLY DROPPED 33 PERCENT
DURING THE SAME PERIOD.
AND SCHOOL CAFETERIA FOOD MIGHT
NOT ALWAYS BE TASTY BUT IT IS
NUTRITIOUS.
VIRGINIA TECH RESEARCHERS
SAMPLED 1,300 LUNCHES AND FOUND
THAT SCHOOL FOOD SERVED TO
PRESCHOOLERS AND KINDERGARTNERS
WAS HEALTHIER THAN LUNCHES
PACKED BY THE KIDS' PARENTS.
MORE FRUITS AND VEGETABLES IN
THE SCHOOL LUNCHES, MORE CHIPS
AND SUGARY DRINKS IN THOSE
BROUGHT FROM HOME.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ASIA PACIFIC
ECONOMIC COOPERATION SUMMIT IS
ABOUT TO GET UNDERWAY IN
BEIJING.
AND EARLIER TODAY, THE PRESIDENT
LEFT FOR CHINA.
WHILE THERE, HE WILL BE MEETING
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN 18 MONTHS
WITH CHINESE PRESIDENT XI
JINPING.
IT'S PRESIDENT OBAMA'S FIRST
VISIT TO CHINA SINCE 2009.
WHAT IS THE STATE OF CHINA'S
RELATIONSHIPS WITH WORLD POWERS
INCLUDING THE UNITED STATES,
JAPAN AND RUSSIA?
FOR MORE ABOUT ALL THIS, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM SAN FRANCISCO BY
ORVILLE SCHELL.
HE IS THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER
ON U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS AT THE
ASIA SOCIETY.
>> THIS IS A REGION THAT'S
RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT 40% OF THE
WORLD'S POPULATION, MORE THAN
50% OF THE TRADE THAT'S COMING
OUT INTO THE WORLD NOW RIGHT?
>> INDEED AND I THINK THIS APEC
MEETING IS A VERY BIG MOMENT FOR
A TREMENDOUS NUMBER RATHER
CONTENTIOUS ISSUES.
ONE THAT HAVE HAD A RELATIVELY
SALUTARY CONCLUSION, IT LOOKS
LIKE, ABE MAY MEET WITH XI
JINPING AND THEY'VE WORKED OUT
AN AGREEMENT WHICH ACTUALLY SORT
OF RETURNS IT TO THE STATUS QUO,
WHICH IS THAT THEY WILL AGREE TO
DISAGREE AND NOT LET THESE
ISLANDS SORT OF BEDEVIL THEIR
LARGER RELATIONSHIP WHICH IS
VERY GOOD.
IT IS SOMEWHAT OF A MODEL FOR
THE U.S. AND CHINA WHICH SHOWS
WE CAN TAKE THE ISSUES WHICH
DIVIDE US AND PUT THEM IN THE
PARALLEL UNIVERSE AND SEE IF
COMMON INTERESTS CAN BE
RESOLVED.
HELP US UNDERSTAND, SOME SAY
IT'S A POTENTIAL FOR OIL AND
NATURAL GAS THAT'S SURROUNDING
UNDERNEATH THESE WATERS AND BOTH
THESE ECONOMIES ARE VERY HUNGRY
FOR FUEL.
>> I THINK MORE IMPORTANTLY IS
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THESE ISSUES.
IT APPEARED THAT DENG XIAOPING
INCREDIBLY CONSERVATIVE
GOVERNOR OF TOKYO ISHIHARA
THREATENED TO BUY THREE OF THEM
PERMLY AND IS HE A VERY --
PERSONALLY, AND HE IS A ARE VERY
XENOPHOBIC INDIVIDUAL.
SO THEY ARE OFF TO THE RACES.
AND NOW I THINK WITH ABE GOING
TO BEIJING AND PROBABLY MEETING
WITH XI JINPING WE PAY SEE
SOMETHING OF A RETURN TO THAT
AGREEMENT TO DISAGREE AND GET
ALONG WITH THE LARGER AND VERY
IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIP.
>> ALSO AT THIS CONFERENCE WE'RE
NOT THE ONLY NONASIA SUPERPOWER.
I'VE HEARD RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN IS THERE.
HE'S HAD AN IMPACTFUL YEAR.
WHAT DOES THAT DO TOT MEETING?
>> THAT THE MEETING IS
SUPERCHARGED WITH RADIO CIFER
TENSIONS.
ONE THING THAT'S VERY
CHARACTERISTIC FOR CHINA AND THE
CHINESE LEADERSHIP, IF THEY HOST
SOMETHING THEY WANT IT TO BE
SUCCESSFUL.
SO I THINK YOU WILL FIND THEM
STRIVING MIGHTILY TO COME OUT OF
IT WITH MAJOR AGREEMENTS BOTH
WITH JAPAN AND HOPEFULLY WITH
THE UNITED STATES.
AND I THINK THEY ALREADY HAVE
THEIR $400 BILLION GAS AND OIL
DEAL WITH PUTIN.
SO HE MAY BE SOMETHING OF A
LITTLE LESS CRITICAL THAN OBAMA,
ABE AND XI JINPING.
>> AND ARE YOU EVER IMPRESSED BY
HOW THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT IS
ABLE TO CLEAR THE AIR WHEN THEY
WANT OVER THE SKIES OF BEIJING?
IT TURNS OUT THAT THEY SHUT DOWN
FACTORIES, THEY PULL CARS OFF
ROADS, THEY TRY TO GET BLUE
SKIES FOR THIS MEETING.
>> THIS JUST TELLS US HOW
IMPORTANT APPEARANCES ARE TO
CHINA.
HOW MUCH CHINA REALLY WANTS TO
BE TAKEN SERIOUSLY, HOW MUCH
THEY WANT TO BE RESPECTED AN
HAVE RATHER SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS
IN THEIR COUNTRY APPRECIATED AND
TAKEN SERIOUSLY.
>> ORVILLE SCHELL FROM SAN SAN
FRANCISCO, THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
YOU'VE NO DOUBT SEEN HEADLINES
LIKE THIS ONE, DESCRIBING HUGE
AWARDS MADE TO PEOPLE CONVICTED
OF CRIMES THEY DIDN'T COMMIT.
BUT THOSE HEADLINES MIGHT
ACTUALLY CREATE A MISIMPRESSION.
BECAUSE, AS WE DISCOVERED, MANY
STATES ACROSS THE COUNTRY DON'T
COMPENSATE THE WRONGLY CONVICTED
AT ALL.
AND EVEN WHEN SOME FORMER
INMATES SUCCESSFULLY SUE, THE
PROCESS CAN TAKE YEARS.
ON ANY GIVEN AFTERNOON IN
BRADDOCK PENNSYLVANIA ON THE
OUTSKIRTS OF PITTSBURGH YOU'LL
FIND DREW WHITLEY IN STAMBOLIS
MEAT SHOP HELPING TO CLEAN UP.
IT'S ABOUT ALL HE CAN DO NOW.
HE TAKES VALIUM FOR AN ANXIETY
THAT IS VERY REAL FOR HIM.
WHAT'S YOUR LIFE BEEN LIKE?
>> SOME DAYS I WAKE UP WITH
NIGHTMARES FROM THE NIGHT
BEFORE.
YOU KNOW I STILL HAVE NIGHTMARES
ABOUT BEING LOCKED UP.
IF THEY LOCKED YOU UP FOR... FOR
GETTING LIFE WITHOUT PAROLE FOR
SOMETHING YOU THEY KNOW YOU
DIDN'T DO, AIN'T NO TELLING WHAT
THEY MIGHT DO, FAR AS I'M
CONCERNED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO YOU ARE STILL
LIVING IN FEAR OF THE JUSTICE
SYSTEM?
>> OH, YES.
I THINK I'LL BE THAT WAY FOR THE
REST OF MY LIFE.
WHITLEY'S FEAR AND ANXIETY ARE
BASED ON FACT.
IN 1989, WHITLEY, WHO HAD TWO
PREVIOUS CONVICTIONS FOR THEFT
AND RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY,
WAS CONVICTED IN THE HIGH
PROFILE MURDER OF NOREEN MALLOY,
A 22-YEAR-OLD McDONALD'S
MANAGER IN DUQUESNE,
PENNSYLVANIA, ANOTHER TOWN NEAR
PITTSBURGH.
ALTHOUGH HE ALWAYS MAINTAINED
HIS INNOCENCE,
>> I'M HOPING THE JUDGE WILL
GRANT THE D.N.A. TEST SO THE
WHOLE CITY OF PITTSBURGH CAN SEE
THAT THEY GOT ANOTHER INNOCENT
MAN.
>> Sreenivasan: HE SERVED 18
YEARS IN PRISON BEFORE D.N.A.
TESTING PROVED THAT HAIRS FOUND
IN THE KILLER'S SKI MASK DID NOT
BELONG TO HIM.
IN 2006, HE WAS SET FREE.
EIGHT YEARS LATER, DREW
WHITLEY'S EXONERATED LIFE IS
ANYTHING BUT EASY.
HE GETS A DISABILITY CHECK FOR
$700 A MONTH.
JUST LAST YEAR AT AGE 58 HE
MOVED OUT OF HIS MOTHER'S HOME
INTO A TINY TWO ROOM APARTMENT
WHICH COSTS HIM NEARLY HALF HIS
CHECK
DID PEOPLE ASSUME THAT AS SOON
AS YOU WERE EXONERATED THAT YOU
WOULD BE PAID MONEY?
>> OH, YES. I DID TOO.
(LAUGHS)
ME TOO.
YES.
AND IT SHOULD BE LIKE THAT IN
EVERY STATE.
BUT FOR ALL HIS TIME SPENT
WRONGFULLY IN PRISON ALL DREW
WHITLEY GOT WAS $100 THAT HE
EARNED WORKING IN THE PRISON
LAUNDRY.
HE DIDN'T GET ANOTHER PENNY FROM
THE STATE.
WHILE 30 STATES DO OFFER
COMPENSATION TO THE WRONGFULLY
CONVICTED, PENNSYLVANIA, ALONG
WITH 19 OTHERS, OFFERS NOTHING.
BUT EVEN WHERE THERE IS
COMPENSATION AVAILABLE, IT IS
FAR FROM EQUAL.
FOR EXAMPLE, TEXAS, PAYS ALL
EXONEREES $80,000 FOR EACH YEAR
THEY WERE WRONGFULLY IMPRISONED
AND THE STATE IS ONE OF THE FEW
THAT ALSO OFFERS SOME MEDICAL
CARE, LIFE SKILLS, AND
VOCATIONAL TRAINING ONCE THEY
GET OUT.
IN NEW HAMPSHIRE HOWEVER, THE
MAXIMUM AMOUNT AN EXONEREE IS
ENTITLED TO IS $20,000, NO
MATTER HOW LONG THE INNOCENT
PERSON SPENT IN PRISON.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS IT'S
OWN STANDARD, OFFERING $50,000
FOR EACH YEAR OF WRONGFUL
INCARCERATION
BUT WHILE THERE HAVE BEEN
EFFORTS SINCE AT LEAST 2009 IN
THE PENNSYLVANIA LEGISLATURE TO
INTRODUCE A COMPENSATION
STATUTE, IT'S GONE NOWHERE.
THOSE WHO OPPOSE A PROPOSED
COMPENSATION STATUTE IN
PENNSYLVANIA SAY THAT THERE IS
LACK OF REGARD FOR INNOCENT
VICTIMS.
THEY HAVE BEEN SHOWN NO EVIDENCE
OF THE NEED FOR SUCH A LAW.
>> IF ANYBODY HAD ANY KIND OF
MORALS IN THE GOVERNMENT, WHEN
SOMETHING LIKE THAT HAPPENED,
THEY SHOULD REACH OUT AND FIX
IT.
AND THAT'S NOT WHAT HAPPENS.
THEY FIGHT.
THEY DON'T FIX.
>> Sreenivasan: BILL MOUSHEY IS
A JOURNALISM PROFESSOR AT POINT
PARK UNIVERSITY IN PITTSBURGH
AND A PULITZER PRIZE NOMINATED
REPORTER.
FOR YEARS HE AND HIS STUDENTS
HAVE INVESTIGATED CASES OF THE
WRONGFULLY CONVICTED IN
PENNSYLVANIA.
HIS REPORTING IN THE PITTSBURGH
POST GAZETTE HELPED GET DREW
WHITLEY EXONERATED, AND HE STILL
UPSET BY CASES LIKE WHITLEY'S
>> THEY USED TO HAVE HOPELESS
LOOKS IN THEIR EYES WHEN I'D
LOOK AT THEM ACROSS THE TABLE IN
A PRISON.
BUT NOW THEY HAVE HELPLESS
LOOKS.
AND I THINK THE HELPLESS IS A
LOT WORSE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY?
>> BECAUSE THEY WORKED THEIR
WHOLE LIVES IN PRISON TO GET OUT
OF PRISON BECAUSE THEY DIDN'T DO
WHATEVER IT WAS THEY WERE
CHARGED WITH.
AND THEN THEY GET OUT AND
NOTHING IS THE WAY THEY APPEAR--
IT SHOULD HAVE BEEN.
THEY ARE JUST THROWN ON THE
SCRAPHEAP OF LIFE LIKE THEY WERE
THE DAY THEY WALKED INTO PRISON.
AND THE ONLY DIFFERENCE IS, IS
THAT THEY'RE ONLY PRISONERS OF
THEIR OWN HOMES NOW AND NOT OF
THE STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT KIND OF
SUPPORT SERVICES EXIST FOR THEM
AFTER THEY'RE OUT?
>> NONE.
>> Sreenivasan: IN FACT, MOUSHEY
SAYS THAT WHEN THEY ARE RELEASED
THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN CONVICTED
ARE IN MANY WAYS BETTER OFF THAN
BUT ARE LATER CLEARED.
>> IF YOU GET PAROLED IN
PENNSYLVANIA OR ANY STATE,
YOU'RE PUT UNDER A VERY
RESTRICTIVE SERIES OF COVENANTS
WHERE, YOU KNOW, THEY BLOOD TEST
YOU FOR DRUGS, THEY MAKE YOU GO
GET A JOB, THEY LEAD YOU TO JOB
SEARCH AGENCIES, THEY SHOW YOU
HOW TO BUILD A RESUME, THEY SHOW
YOU A VARIETY OF OTHER THINGS
THAT ARE SUPPOSED TO HELP YOU
MELD BACK INTO SOCIETY.
WHEN YOU GET EXONERATED, THEY
OPEN THE DOOR AND SAY, "SEE YA
LATER!"
THERE IS ANOTHER OPTION TO TRY
TO GET COMPENSATED: SUING.
THAT'S WHAT JEFFREY DESKOVIC
DID.
LIKE DREW WHITLEY, DESKOVIC WAS
ALSO WRONGFULLY CONVICTED OF
MURDER AND EVEN HAD AN
ADDITIONAL CHARGE FOR RAPE IN
NEW YORK STATE AND SERVED ALMOST
AS MUCH TIME IN PRISON BEFORE HE
WAS ALSO EXONERATED IN 2006 BY
D.N.A.
BUT HE SUED AND WAS AWARDED MORE
THAN $13 MILLION BY THE STATE OF
NEW YORK AND THE OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES INVOLVED IN HIS
CONVICTION.
AND JUST LAST MONTH HE WON
ANOTHER MULTIMILLION DOLLAR
JUDGMENT.
NOW DESKOVIC IS WORKING IN HIS
OWN WAY TO MAKE SURE PEOPLE
DON'T HAVE TO GO THROUGH WHAT HE
DID.
HE SET UP A FOUNDATION WITH HIS
SETTLEMENT MONEY TO HELP
INVESTIGATE OTHER POSSIBLE
WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AS WELL AS OFFER
FINANCIAL AND SOCIAL SUPPORT TO
OTHER EXONERATE SOMETIMES WITH
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE AS A REGULAR
KARAOKE NIGHT WITH OTHER GUYS
WHO ARE WRONGFULLY CONVICTED.
>> IT'S CATHARTIC FOR ME.
AND I FEEL LIKE I'M MAKING A
DIFFERENCE.
AND I'M TRYING TO MAKE MY
SUFFERING COUNT FOR SOMETHING.
>> I MEAN IT TOOK LESS THAN A
YEAR FOR ME TO GET... GET TO A
TRIAL AND TO BE WRONGFULLY
CONVICTED ON THE CRIMINAL SIDE.
AND IN TERMS OF GETTING A
SETTLEMENT, IT TOOK FIVE YEARS.
AND THEN TO EVEN GET A... GET TO
A CIVIL RIGHTS TRIAL-- EIGHT
YEARS.
AND THEN NO SOCIAL SERVICES IN
THE MEANTIME.
>> Sreenivasan: DREW WHITLEY
SUED IN FEDERAL COURT ALLEGING
THAT HIS CIVIL RIGHTS WERE
VIOLATED.
BUT THE BAR FOR PROVING
MISCONDUCT IS HIGH.
EVEN THOUGH A FEDERAL JUDGE
AGREED THAT POLICE OFFICERS WERE
NEGLIGENT, SHE RULED AGAINST HIS
LAWSUIT SAYING, "A REASONABLE
OFFICER IN 1989 WOULD NOT HAVE
FAIR WARNING THAT CONDUCTING A
RECKLESS INVESTIGATION WAS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL."
>> Sreenivasan: SO, EVEN THOUGH
THERE ARE ADMISSIONS OF MISTAKES
AND OF SHODDY POLICE WORK, DREW
WHITLEY IS UNLIKELY TO GET PAID
BY PENNSYLVANIA.
>> WELL, NOT UNLIKELY.
HE'S NOT GONNA GET PAID.
HE SUED.
THE JUDGE THREW THE CASE OUT.
AND THERE'S REALLY NO RECOURSE,
UNLESS WE HAD A COMPENSATION
PACKAGE.
AND WE DON'T.
>> Sreenivasan: IF ALL OF THIS
STRIKES YOU AS ARBITRARY THAT
ONE WRONGFULLY CONVICTED PERSON
IS PAID WHILE ANOTHER IS NOT,
IT'S BECAUSE OUR CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM IS LARGELY
DECIDED BY EACH INDIVIDUAL
STATE.
>> WE'RE DEALING WITH, YOU KNOW,
50 DIFFERENT STATES PLUS THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, RIGHT.
AND THEY TAKE DIFFERENT VIEWS
ABOUT THESE MATTERS.
>> Sreenivasan: BERNARD HARCOURT
IS A LAW PROFESSOR AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY WHO STUDIES
PUNISHMENT IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM.
HE SAYS THAT WHILE COMPENSATION
PACKAGES MAY BE THE MORE
IMMEDIATE AND CERTAIN ROUTE FOR
HELPING EXONEREES, MULTIMILLION
DOLLAR LAWSUITS COULD HAVE A
LARGER IMPACT.
>> ONE OF MY FEARS REALLY IS
THAT IF YOU HAVE A TOO
STRAIGHTFORWARD SYSTEM WHERE
ANYONE WHO IS WRONGFULLY
CONVICTED GETS $50,000 A YEAR,
WE STOP PAYING ATTENTION YOU
LOSE THE IMPETUS TO REALLY TRY
TO MAKE SURE THAT NO ONE
ACTUALLY GOES THROUGH THIS.
>> Sreenivasan: HAVING BEEN
THROUGH IT HIMSELF, DESKOVIC
SAYS THAT PREVENTING WRONGFUL
CONVICTIONS IS EVEN MORE
IMPORTANT THAN COMPENSATING
EXONEREES AFTER THE FACT.
>> IT COULD NEVER GIVE ME MY
YEARS BACK.
I WOULD BE WILLING TO NOT ONLY
GIVE THE MONEY BACK.
I'D BE WILLING TO GO INTO DEBT
FOR THAT AMOUNT OF MONEY, MAYBE
EVEN DOUBLE IT, TO HAVE HAD MY
YEARS BACK, TO HAVE HAD A
LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: A NORMAL LIFE IS
ALL DREW WHITLEY WAS HOPING FOR
WHEN HE WAS EXONERATED.
WHAT WERE YOUR EXPECTATIONS FOR
YOUR LIFE WHEN YOU GOT OUT?
>> A GOOD PLACE TO STAY, FOOD TO
EAT AND TRANSPORTATION.
THAT'S ALL I REALLY WANT OUT OF
LIFE.
LIKE EVERYBODY ELSE.
I DON'T WANT TO BE FILTHY RICH
OR A MILLIONAIRE, OR WHATEVER.
I JUST WANT A PLACE TO STAY.
ROOF OVER MY HEAD AND
TRANSPORTATION.
>> Sreenivasan: TUESDAY IS
VETERAN'S DAY, A DAY TO HONOR
THOSE WHO HAVE SERVED.
BUT SINCE THE DRAFT ENDED IN
1973, THE NUMBER OF AMERICANS
WHO SERVE HAS DECREASED
DRAMATICALLY LEADING TO WHAT
SOME FEAR IS A LACK OF
UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN OUR
MILITARY AND CIVILIAN
POPULATIONS.
NOW, SOME YOUNG VETERANS HAVE
DEVISED A PROGRAM TO TRY TO
BRIDGE THE DIVIDE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ELISABETH PONSOT
REPORTS.
>> INITIAL READER RESPONSES,
LET'S JUST GET THAT OUT OF OUR
SYSTEM BEFORE WE START TALKING
CRAFT.
>> Reporter: HERE IN BROOKLYN, A
GROUP GATHERS TO DISCUSS THE
VIETNAM WAR NOVEL, TREE OF
SMOKE.
BUT THIS IS NO ORDINARY BOOK
CLUB.
IT'S A MEETING OF CURRENT AND
FORMER STUDENTS OF WORDS AFTER
WAR, A NONPROFIT THAT BRINGS
VETERANS AND CIVILIANS TOGETHER
TO DISCUSS MILITARY CONFLICT
THROUGH A LITERARY LENS.
BRANDON WILLITTS, A FORMER
INTELLIGENCE ANALYST IN THE
NAVY, CO-FOUNDED WORDS AFTER WAR
LAST YEAR.
>> YOU WERE 18 WHEN YOU
ENLISTED?
>> I WAS.
I HAD JUST GRADUATED FROM HIGH
SCHOOL WHEN I ENLISTED.
IT WAS-- SHORTLY AFTER 9/11.
AT THE TIME, YOU KNOW, THERE WAS
A REAL GRAVITY TO THE SITUATION.
AND IT FELT VERY IMMEDIATE. AND
I FELT LIKE I HAD TO DO
SOMETHING.
AND THAT WAS THE ONLY THING I
COULD THINK OF TO DO WAS TO JOIN
THE MILITARY.
>> WILLITTS DEPLOYED OVERSEAS IN
2004, SERVING IN AFGHANISTAN,
BAHRAIN AND QATAR.
HE RETURNED HOME IN JUNE OF
2005.
>> AFTER OVER FOUR YEARS IN THE
NAVY, WILLITTS MOVED TO VERMONT
TO PURSUE A COLLEGE DEGREE. BUT
AT SCHOOL, HE SAYS, HE FELT LIKE
AN OUTSIDER.
>> I THINK IT'S LIKE BEING A
UNICORN, WHAT I IMAGINE WHAT
BEING LIKE A UNICORN WOULD BE IS
THAT, THEY'RE LIKE, "OH THAT'S
SO INTERESTING BUT YET WE SHOULD
PROBABLY KEEP OUR DISTANCE
BECAUSE IT'S SO FOREIGN TO US
AND SO ALIEN TO US."
THAT'S WHAT IT WAS LIKE BEING A
VETERAN ON A SMALL, LIBERAL ARTS
CAMPUS IN NEW ENGLAND.
WAS THAT, I THINK PEOPLE DIDN'T
KNOW WHAT TO MAKE OF ME.
>> DURING WORLD WAR II, MORE
THAN 12% OF THE AMERICAN
POPULATION SERVED IN THE ARMED
FORCES.
AS OF 2013, THAT NUMBER STANDS
AT LESS THAN .5%.
>> THERE'S A JOKE WITHIN THE
VETERANS COMMUNITY THAT WE'RE
THE "OTHER ONE PERCENT."
NOT THE WALL STREET BARONS, BUT
THE OTHER ONE PERCENT OF
AMERICAN SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: MATT GALLAGHER IS A
WRITING INSTRUCTOR AT WORDS
AFTER WAR.
AT 22, HE JOINED THE ARMY AS A
CAVALRY OFFICER AND SERVED A 15-
MONTH TOUR IN IRAQ.
HIS MEMOIR, "KABOOM," WAS
PUBLISHED IN 2010.
>> I WAS A LITTLE ANGRY WHEN I
FIRST CAME BACK.
IN A WAY I FELT THAT THE
MILITARY WAS BEING USED AND
TAKEN FOR GRANTED BY THE BROADER
AMERICAN SOCIETY.
THE WWII GENERATION, BOTH MY
GRANDFATHERS SERVED.
THEY WENT TO WAR WITH AMERICA.
WE WENT TO WAR FOR AMERICA.
IT'S A VERY SUBTLE BUT IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION.
>> Reporter: GALLAGHER LEADS THE
GROUP IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
BATTLES CONTEMPORARY AND
HISTORIC.
STUDENTS SHARE THEIR OPINIONS
ABOUT WAR AND CRITIQUE ONE
ANOTHER'S WORK.
IN CASE YOU'RE WONDERING WHAT
CIVILIANS GET OUT OF THE
WORKSHOP, THEY SAY IT GIVES THEM
A WINDOW INTO WHAT IT'S LIKE TO
SERVE IN THE 21ST CENTURY.
>> WE ARE IN SEARCH OF WRITERS
WHO ARE INTERESTED IN HAVING
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT WAR AND
CONFLICT WITH CIVILIANS.
>> AND WHAT DO CIVILIANS BRING
TO THE TABLE?
>> THEY'RE COMING WITH THE
TANGIBLE SKILLS.
THEY'RE COMING WITH WORDS ON THE
PAGE.
AND THE VETERANS BRING THE
EXPERIENCE.
AND I THINK BROUGHT TOGETHER
THERE'S A SHARED RELATIONSHIP.
THERE'S A MENTORSHIP THAT CAN
FORM.
FOR THOSE OF US WHO TRANSITIONED
OUT INTO THE CIVILIAN WORLD I
THINK IT'S OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO
ENGAGE CIVILIANS AND TO LET THEM
KNOW ABOUT THE EXPERIENCES OF
COMBAT, OF CONFLICT, OF
TRANSITION.
IT'S SO IMPORTANT THAT... THAT
AMERICANS STAY ENGAGED AND
INVOLVED WITH THEIR MILITARY.
LIKE IT OR NOT IT WASN'T JUST
MILITARY PATCHES THAT WE WORE
OVER THERE.
WE WORE THE AMERICAN FLAG.
WE WERE REPRESENTING EACH AND
EVERY AMERICAN CITIZEN.
IF ON SOME SMALL LEVEL, THE
WORDS AFTER WAR WRITING WORKSHOP
CAN KIND OF BRIDGE THAT DIVIDE.
THEN WE'RE DOING OUR PART.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Sreenivasan: NEW RESEARCH
BEING CONDUCTED ON TWINS IN
BRITAIN SHOWS A CLOSE CONNECTION
BETWEEN THE BACTERIA IN YOUR
STOMACH AND THE AMOUNT OF WEIGHT
YOU GAIN OR LOSE.
ITN'S SCIENCE EDITOR TOM CLARKE
REPORTS.
>> CHAT HAS VOLUNTEERED TO TAKE
PART IN A VOLUNTEER EXPERIMENT,
ABOUT, UNIQUE BECAUSE SHE HAS AN
IDENTICALLY TWIN ROSIE INVOLVED
IN THE STUDY TOO.
THEY'RE PART OF THE MOST WELL
RESEARCHED GROUP OF ADULT TWINS
IN THE WORLD CALLED THE U.K.
TWINS PROJECTS, IN THE KINGS
COLLEGE IN LONDON.
THEY ARE CONDUCTING EXPERIMENTS
ON WEIGHT, AND MOST IMPORTANT,
GUT BACTERIA.
WHAT THEY JUST FOUND, ACCORDING
TO LEAD RESEARCHER TIM SPECTER,
IS QUITE REMARKABLE.
>> HOW WE RESPOND TO FOODS IN
VERY DIFFERENT WAYS AND WHY SOME
PEOPLE GET FAT ON THE DIET AND
OTHERS LOSE IT.
>> DNA IN STOOL SAMPLES FOR 416
PAIRS OF TWINS, THEY DISCOVERED
A LITTLE KNOWN GROUP OF ANCIENT
BACTERIA, MORE PROBABLE IN
SKINNIER INDIVIDUALS THAN FATTER
INDIVIDUALS.
>> THE OPPOSITE TWIN WHO DIDN'T
WE PUT THOSE INTO MICE AND FOUND
THAT THE ONE WITH THE LOTS OF
MICROBES WOULD PREVENT THAT
MOUSE FROM BECOMING FAT AND THE
OTHER ONE WHO DIDN'T HAVE IT
BECAME OBESE.
>> PRO-BIOTIC MATERIAL, DOSES
WOULD HAVE TO BE TAILORED TO
MATCH THE RECIPIENT'S GENES.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
WILL HOLD A SECOND DAY OF TALKS
TOMORROW WITH IRAN'S FOREIGN
MINISTER TO TRY TO RESOLVE
LINGERING DISAGREEMENTS OVER
THAT COUNTRY'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
THE DEADLINE FOR A DEAL IS TWO
WEEKS AWAY.
AND THE WHITE HOUSE IS
EXPRESSING CONCERN ABOUT WHAT
IS DESCRIBED AS THE WORST
FIGHTING IN OVER A MONTH IN
IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
UKRAINE HAS ACCUSED RUSSIA OF
SENDING TANKS AND TROOPS INTO
THAT COUNTRY IN THE PAST FEW
DAYS.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.